Let's go to the latest in SEO news and
AI search. In today's SEO to learn,
didn't read. In today's edition, I have
the great company of Chris Green, who's
the technical director at Torque
Partnerships. Hello, Chris. Thank you
very much for Thank you for having me.
Pleasure. I want to thank Similar Web
who's our today's sponsor. Let's go
through the top news in SEO because
there's so much going on. The first one
is this boss that I did covering Google
AI modes adoption versus other verticals
via similar web click stream data in
desktop in the US. They had shared some
initial data a few days ago but then I
asked if they could please follow up
given a little bit of context how does
this relate with the other tabs with the
other search verticals that Google has.
They sent that to me and additionally
they also share the data of the latest
days too which shows that pretty much
the growth had peaked. It actually
became flat. I mean when you initially
shared the data that didn't have that
context it still felt a little high. I
know like 1% isn't large but relative to
all US search if if we extrapol like
that's that felt high like as as a
general stat but when you compare it to
news and shopping which is sort of 1 to
2% depending maybe 3% on a good day this
feels like a significant change or
difference perhaps more surprising to me
is how few people are clicking on
shopping and news and I think as those
two streams are relatively small I know
the SERs are integrating those that
might remove the need to click on that
tab. But this feels high. It's such a
short time frame and I'd love to see
what the the tale of that is and it
stretching off. But I would imagine this
will increase. It will have to I think
Google are going to make it a feature
that it will increase whether or not we
can read it as people liking it or not.
We need to realize that so far this is
highly tied to the inclusion of AI
overviews. At the end of the day, a lot
of AI overviews are very connected right
now withformational type of queries, not
necessarily that much of transactional
commercial because of the implications.
Now Google has started to show adverts
in AI overviews. So my feeling is that
now that they have uh a way to monetize
them, the shorter inclusion of AI
overviews for this more commercially
oriented queries will increase on one
hand and also more people will be I
guess also incentivized to click more on
continue digging on AI mode and also
eventually what you mentioned too what
if Google starts to showcase AI mode
first for many scenarios in the future,
right? pushing the user more towards an
AI mode experience whenever they feel
ready that they are monetizing AI mode
too because this is what pretty much
restricts them. Let's see how this
evolves in any case in the next week. I
will keep you updated. The second news
that I want to cover today is connected
to that is the SEO versus G or AIO or
whatever we want to call it. I want to
continue and I will keep this updated
showing the differences and similarities
to it and to make it even clearer. Not
only I expanded the the areas showcasing
the level of difference of each activity
of the different areas from user search
behavior optimizations areas. I also
expanded here to include the results
presentation and delivery because these
were a lot actually changes and impacts
of course the behavior and also the
goals and metrics. Each one of them have
now a much more specific explanation and
much more straightforward let's say
difference level that hopefully allow us
to understand what actually changes or
not and I believe that here it is pretty
clear that in the optimizations areas
the concepts let's say the areas
themselves are very very similar but the
way that they actually change versus
each other is many times the way that it
is executed or should be executed
because of the query final technique
that LLM or AI search relies on for
example the level of personalization for
example and in the case of the user
behavior of course it is highly highly
impacted by the very big difference in
the results presentation and delivery.
So hopefully this will help to clarify
many of the doubts or how different it
is or not how much do we need to change
or not. I think for me the starkest
contrast right now is how we track and
report on it. I think this highlights
and and we kind of look out there is how
a lot of the old paradigms of tracking,
reporting, the tools we might have used
seem to feel very old and very dated
very quickly because the interface is
different. How the results are generated
is different. The significance in how
you track the results, what search
console gives you, for example. A lot of
that is so fundamentally different that
it it has caused a really sharp turn or
a need for us to to really look at it, I
think. and visualizing it in this way
has shown how stuck that kind of
contrast is. It's a lot different in a
way that scares me because frankly we as
an industry have already solved a lot of
these problems one two or three times
since SEO has been kind of a thing. I
mean this is probably one of the most
significant changes I've ever seen. The
thing that I take comfort from though,
however, is a lot of what the industry
has pivoted to over the last, I guess,
two years around what good or quality
looks like. A lot of that is still close
enough that it doesn't represent a
complete change of actually what we do.
I think this shows that the detail and
the minutia is very different. There's a
lot of learning. There's a lot of things
we need to change. But then when we
translate that into something that's
actually useful or implementable, it
doesn't change that much. Not that it's
directionally different, isn't it? I
guess I'm extrapolating this piece of
content to what everyone needs to do and
it is just kind of chill a little bit
like write down everything. How does it
actually change what you need to do now?
What do you need to act on right now
versus the future? Going back to the
data you were showing the first piece
like it's one to two% right now. I know
there's there's there's this kind of
worry of this existential threat that is
around the corner. you know, when AIM
mode takes over, it's like it may do, it
may do in a similar format, but we're
not here yet. This is this is the
perfect time to kind of prepare to calm
yourself, to calm your stakeholders.
This week in particular, this guide
attracted a lot of popularity, a lot of
attention, and I can understand why is a
guide from world lifts durat explaining
AI mode in simple terms, a clear guide
to the new era of search results. And he
goes with very layman terms and in a
very actionable way explaining what it
is and how it works. the real
implications in how we do things. Where
is query fan out which might sound very
complicated and sophisticated is like
Google ask many question not just one in
parallel right building a custom corpus
AI creates a personal bookshelves or lls
assemble the answer I work like a team
of editors right so I love how he
explained this in very simple terms
giving comparisons and what it means for
SEOs and content creators very
actionable tips specific tips that we
can start incorporating eating. I like
this piece firstly because the objective
of this piece is to help people
understand it and I don't feel that's
shared across everything that's been
written so far. I think this is this is
one of the first that's seems really to
the primary objective is let's bring
everyone for the journey along for the
journey and I'm I've always got so much
time for that because you know that
conduit that communication is the most
important for us to all get on board. I
think for me there's a couple of
elements from here that really stuck
with me. First one, and this is kind of
a a drum I've been banging or a sermon I
keep making for for years. It's it's
ranking versus visibility. Like this,
the ranking paradigm is been changing
beyond a point of usefulness for a while
now. A mode comes out and everyone says,
"Oh, rank trackers are are now useless
or they need to fundamentally change
what they do." what they do. I think the
SEO industry has needed to really change
how we consider ranking for a while
because personalization 10 blue link
paradigm has been dead for almost as
long as it hasn't um and various like
that. But what's really powerful about
this here is that you have to be visible
in the contexts that are valuable to
you. So an arbitrary keyword search at a
given point at a given time repeated
daily, weekly or monthly is no longer a
great proxy for actually how well you
perform. And I think that's if now is
when people don't listen to that, like
there's almost no hope for them. They're
lost, you know, just just keep going in
that direction. So I think that's super
useful. I think I know um Mike's also
issued um a challenge to the tool part
tool industry within SEO that basically
said you're you're not rising up to meet
the challenge yet and I would say he's
right but also give them chance it's
kind of still fairly new but I think you
mentioned we talked before like the tool
providers this been an influx over the
last couple of days and I think that the
next couple of weeks and months we'll
see we'll see an explosion and then you
maybe there'll be too many in a couple
of months time but so that was really
key and then The other part that's
really um stuck with me is the whole
think in passages, not pages element.
And this is this is for me this is the
really important part. I like custom
bookshelf analogy, but I've been
thinking it more as if like we're all
scrapbooking. Like we're all taking
snippets from things we like and we're
all putting them together to create
something for us. I think Google is now
scrapbooking for us and and I think this
is recognition that a single page has
never been enough for that person at
that time. And if you think about the
range of different intents that people
have, the fact that when people search,
they might not even know what the right
result for them is. Like this kind of
gluing together of all of these various
passages is so intrinsic to just making
this experience quicker. And we have to
stop thinking of the page as the
document and of the parts of the
different journeys. And that's again
that's that's a big mindset shift for
most people because again SEOs like we
have been preoccupied with URLs with
information architecture across URLs
with clusters of content like make it
very obvious for search engines that oh
this page is about this should rank for
this. The one thing that's missing here
and this isn't necessarily criticism of
this blog but this is of the overall
conversation is is the talk of
originality. The SEO FOMO event back in
London where we had Gary and one of his
sort of more candid moments was around
the focus on originality. Like if you
have all of the world's data and you've
got to try and pick these passages that
are most important, like how do we
signify that we have the original take
and we're not a summary of a summary?
And I I think I don't know if if we if
it's just because we don't know how
we're going to address the originality
piece or how Google is going to do it
properly in this new kind of vector
space world, but I still we're still
missing that a little bit. I think we're
still at a little bit of a risk of
saying query fan out means lots of FAQs
everywhere in short chunks and we'll
just keep turning that out. And I I
think if I if I want to see any more and
I I need to do some stuff myself on this
is how do we factor originality into
this? That's a really good point,
especially because AI generate content
out there. So, this ties very well with
this piece from Amanda Keen about
revisiting useful content in the age of
AI dominated search and connects also
well with this other article that
performed really well and I'm not
surprised why because it's actually
HubSpot sharing how they create quality
content in the age of AI. So it's a
little bit of two guides that cover
pretty much the same thing but in
different ways with different angles.
The key here is thinking about the
customer not necessarily your popularity
and so on and thinking about the
business and staying on topic with your
business on brand with your business
content and focusing on creating or
building an authority towards what
actually matters for your product or
service expertise at the end of the day.
She provides very specific examples here
goes through actions taking into account
also the Google quality raers guidance
that makes total sense. So I love how
actionable this advice this is how brand
also recognition and authorities is
created and in the case of HubSpot I
love in particular this graph that they
created about what is quality content
because this is such a topic that is so
ambiguous right as top content that
helps your audience and that drives
business goals. So the intersection of
this is what will allow you to create
this information that actually makes
sense for you rather than thinking oh is
this something that LLM will be able to
speed out anyway and the user will be
satisfied and won't generate traffic
anyway and it's pointless because of
that. No, no, no. Different metrics,
different goals and this is content that
even with zero clicks will still be
valuable for us because it actually
communicates what we do and establish
the real expertise or unique position of
our company and business the authority
of it right I think for me the these two
pieces are super super useful because
this is the next question in our kind of
our journey isn't it is kind of like
okay we're starting to fundamentally get
get to the grips of what the
implications of AI mode are. But then
there's the but what do we do
differently? How do we deal with it? I
think the HubSpot one sticks out mostly
because of where they actually start
giving their own examples of how they're
doing it. And some of the examples you
can do because you're HubSpot. You know,
there's a degree of scale and authority
that comes behind it. But some of it, I
think, isn't just that. And I think
there are some real useful nuggets in
here that you can kind of take away. I
think a lot of people need to invest
time into working out well what are the
implications? How do we actually make
this relevant to different brands? The
writing content in chunks advice is
useful but a lot of brands might not
write specifically in that way or their
brand voice might not be
in like currently working alongside some
of these new demands and requirements.
So there's just a degree of how do we
actually do it which I really enjoy and
I find this stuff kind of interesting.
The other thing that really how we might
need to go back to personas again for
our content journeys and I know like
user personas is something that the
marketing world either loves or hates
depending on what month or year or how
long it is. But the idea that the
personalization element that mixes this
up is say well you actually need to
start working out what possible things
might your specific customers want in
much more depth because that might be
rewarded more within the search
experience. I know we've been saying
that for years like personalize your
content or make your content like useful
for customers but search results haven't
been that personalized really not
significantly between people and minor
minor personalization we haven't had to
worry about it like I still think
speaking more towards SEOs than wider
marketers is we're still a little bit
ignorant of and again speaking broadly
but we're still ignorant of what our
specific customers are trying to
achieve. I think a lot of people haven't
gone that extra mile and I think there
is the need for that here. So again I
found that equally equally interesting.
The the final point is this also
addresses another anxiety I think is
here in the industry but maybe we're not
worried enough about it is I don't
really think a lot of SEOs truly
understand what great and useful content
is. A lot of trying and a lot of people
are doing it and again I'm not speaking
ill but it's when we get into let's
scale it it's a 2,000word blog or for
this client we're just going to employ
the glossery technique. So, we're going
to do definitions of everything. It's
like, but you're doing that because it's
a a trope or a a content genre that's in
your playbook, but actually, is it the
most useful thing to that given
customer? Is that truly useful? I think
that this pretty much boils down to how
strategic you are, how much you actually
understand the business. Unfortunately,
in SEO, especially for a long, long
while, we have gotten away too much on
being checklist oriented, very tactical.
And I understand and you make a really
good point about not everybody has the
resources of hotspot to scale stuff. So
for example, speaking about originality,
conduct original research to set
yourself apart from AI and competitors.
But who has the capacity to create the
state of marketing report of their own
industry, right? Like very few companies
at the end of the day. But yes, because
of resource constraints because we have
had this incentive to create content at
scale. I think that we should more about
quality rather than volume as a whole.
and thinking more strategically about
what type of content is actually really
needed to start wrapping up the last
article here 12 new KPIs for the
generative AI search era Dwayne Forester
it's great to see how he goes to how
this all metrics we have been taking so
far a lot into consideration needs to be
refreshed so speaking about chunks
chunks retrieable frequency embeddings
relevant score attribution rate in AI
outputs AI citation count vector index
presence retrieval confidence score. I
believe that many of this overlap LLM
answer coverage AI mode call success
rate semantic density score. So again
many of this more or less overlap with
each other but I believe that three or
four of this along with what ultimately
ends up paying off being the goal of our
work which is conversion revenue is what
we need to start focusing more on. I
also like that he provides useful tools
and resources and data sources that we
can start already using. We have
mentioned we still need more insights,
more tool, better features, but a lot of
it is is already here in maybe in a
little bit of a raw way, but it is here
already. This is the start of the new
conversation for me. I don't think this
is the end where we end up, but I think
this is absolutely fantastic and
provocative piece to to make people see
it. I I kind of think back to the SEO
metric chain that I did where it's kind
of like goes from technical to
financial. It's like the those key
business metrics as you said the what
money are we making that's not going to
change. We still need better attribution
beyond the last click for SEO there. I
think from a technical point of view for
technical marketers that really want to
understand how successful our content
will be is is kind of a leading
indicator. A lot of these feel like they
have a huge amount of promise. I'm
certainly going to go and test creating
some of these. I don't imagine a lot of
these will feature on any exec level or
seuite reports anytime soon, but for for
technical teams, I think Dwayne's done
some of the most significant work I've
seen in in the SEO space towards these
metrics. Completely agree. So, thank
you. Thank you very much for your time,
Chris. It has been amazing to have your
inputs, your insights, giving a refresh
views, and different type of angles to
this week's top news. And you don't need
to wait until the next week in order to
keep up with SEO. Go to the SEO for
news. Remember to like today's video if
you have liked it. Remember to check out
Similar Web. They have one of the very
few data sources that actually provide
prompts in their AI traffic report. So
definitely go and check it out. And
thanks again for their sponsorship
today. And thank you for watching our
today's episode. Like it, subscribe it,
don't miss it, and stay tuned for next
week. Thank you very much again, and
thanks, Chris.